Well everyone and welcome to the tree methods project solutions lecture part 1 in part 1 of this lecture
video series we're going to go ahead and grab the college data and do some exploratory data analysis
.
Let's go ahead and jump to our studio and get started.
All right so here we are at our studio I'm going to go ahead and call the SLR library and then check
out the head of the college data frame.
Again the college data frame the index here are the names of the actual colleges and then the label
we're going to try to predict is whether or not that was a public college or university or a private
college university.
And then we have a bunch of features.
We have things such as the number of applications received the number of applications accepted whether
the new students.
The percentage of the students that were for the top percent of their high school top 10 percent of
high school class versus top 25 percent of high school class out of state tuition estimating them or
a books number of Ph.D. faculty at that particular campus et cetera.
Let's go ahead and clear this out and we'll begin by just saying DMF is college.
Now what I mean by that is just I'm going to assign the variable data frame to college
that way I don't have to keep writing college every time.
Now go ahead and run this.
OK.
Let's go ahead and start exploring the data through some exploratory data analysis.
Nicole G.G. plot two and the first thing I wanted you to do is create a scatterplot of Gatorade versus
room board.
Colored by the private column.
Again that's basically just the room and board cost versus the graduation rate.
Let's go ahead and call it plot passenger data frame DIA and the æsthetics.
I'm going to go ahead and put the room board column on the X-axis and then the grad rate column on the
y axis and this is the scatterplot we should do.
GM underscore points
and I want the aesthetic color for the Shawmut tree layer to be by the private column.
Let's go ahead and check this out.
Going to go and move this over so I can see the actual plot.
And there it is.
Go ahead and click zoom use graduation rate versus room and board.
It looks like as there's maybe a slight trend you increase the room and board costs you tend to have
a higher graduation rate.
It also looks like as far as the coloring is concerned as you increase the room and board cost you're
more likely to have a private school.
So there's a lot more blue points here.
Yes some private versus the smaller red points.
We can go ahead and change the size of that point by just saying something like size is equal to four
.
Maybe that makes it a little more clear and we'll go ahead and call alpha 0.5.
Let's see how much better that makes it.
All right now if we click zoom we get kind of a nicer picture as far as visualizing all this.
Now I can really see clearly that there's a lot more red points below 5000.
Room and board price versus There's mainly just private schools above 5000 room and board price.
OK.
Let's go ahead and close that and move on to the next plot for this next exploratory data analysis plot
.
We wanted a histogram of full time undergrad students and we also wanted to color the spry the private
column mycology plot pass and my data in this case is just DMF and the aesthetic.
I wanted to plot out was for x f undergrad.
So full time undergrad students and then I want to say plus GM underscore histogram and I wanted to
put the fill go to the private column and then something I like doing with the sort of histograms setting
the color equal to black.
That way we get a black outline and I will go ahead and set sequel to 50 and we can even set an alpha
value of around 0.5 and then lets go ahead and add a theme to that will do theme b w.
So we get a nice white background.
Go ahead and plot that out and zoom in see what we get.
OK clearly as far as the private set go most of the schools are under 10000 students.
In fact it looks like the vast majority of the schools are under 5000 students and something to note
here is that these smaller schools tend to be private schools.
And as you get larger and larger institutions or universities they tend to not be private and be public
and that makes sense.
Intuitively most larger schools tend to be public and most private universities tend to be smaller.
And this is clearly shown here in the histogram data as far as a number of undergrads.
Each of these universities Let's go ahead and move on and create a histogram of the graduation rate
colored by private.
This should be interesting.
Go ahead and see.
We'll go ahead and call it cheesy plot to frame the ascetic is going to be the rat race and we're going
to do a histogram so-called GM underscore histogram and these Thetic is going to be Phil equals private's
And like I mentioned before.
I like putting in the color like for the outline.
Let's go ahead and say bin's equals 50 again and we'll say Alpha sequel is 3.6 So it's a little lighter
and then I'll also add the theme BW to this.
OK let's go ahead and zoom in on this and see what we can and for it looks like most schools have a
graduation rate above 50 percent and it looks like most schools have around somewhere between 50 and
100 percent.
But what's interesting here is that we actually have a data point that's above 100 percent graduation
rate.
We know that's wrong because you can't have more than a 100 percent of your students graduating.
Let's go ahead and figure out what college has this graduation rate of above 100 percent.
Want to close this and let's go ahead and say subset of the data frame and we'll see where grad rates
greater than 100.
And you can go ahead and use the plier library if you want to do this as well.
If we call subset notice what we get up we get this Cazenovia college as the output.
And this is actually just returning the entire row for that data frame if we go ahead and move this
over to the right and do that line again.
Might be a little more clear.
So we see all the column values for that particular college or we're going to go ahead and do is change
this value to from 118 percent graduation rate to 100 percent graduation rate.
That way it actually makes sense.
We're going to clear the council.
We're going to call DMF
Cazenovia college.
That indicates the ROE.
And I want to change the grad rate column.
I'm passing in the index row and the column and I'm going to go ahead and change the value of that cell
to 100.
And you can go ahead and check out the overview data from operations in case you're a little fuzzy on
how to do this.
And now if we check to make sure that works we can subset E-F Radda rates greater than 100 and notice
we don't get anything back.
We get zero rows.
We get all the column names but nothing actually in the rows.
Perfect.
Looks like we're able to successfully turn that one 18 to 100.
Now that that's fixed let's go ahead and begin the train test on our data.
I'm going to go ahead and go to the script and we'll go train test splits.
We're going to call the CAA tools library.
We're going to set the C to 101.
And when I say sample call sample split Hopefully by now you're very familiar of this.
And as I always say I like to pass in the column that we're going to be trying to predict.
And then let's go ahead and indicate the split ratio to zero point seven 0 and then I would say train
is subset data frame where the sample is equal to true and test is a subset of the data frame where
that sample is equal to false.
All right let's go ahead and run that source.
Looks like it all went well.
Now it's time to build a decision tree and I'm going to go ahead and build this decision tree just straight
in the con..
So it's only a few lines.
I'm going to call the our parts library and then I'm going to go ahead and call a variable a tree.
I'm going to call the our part function from the our part library I pass in my formula.
Remember we're trying to predict whether a school is private or not till all the features pass and methods
classes we're doing classification.
And then my data source in this case is just going to be my training data because later on we're going
to want to do predictions off of this.
All right.
We went ahead and built our decision tree.
If you want you can actually check a summary of the tree if you want some information on it.
But we're going to go ahead and try to get more intuitive information by just asking.
Getting predictions from the model and we can go ahead and do that by using the SO predict we say tree
reds for tree predictions number we call it predict function in our model.
In this case it's tree.
And then we pass in our test set.
Now that we have the predictions let's go ahead and check the head of these predictions just to see
what format this is in.
If I check head of tree creds notice I get back probabilities and basically these numbers represent
the probability that the model is sure that it's us versus no.
In this case it's ninety nine point six six eight seven percent sure that Adrian college.
Yes it's a private school and it's believed that the probability of it being no is point 3 3 percent
.
Well we're going to do in order to actually create a table of a confusion matrix is turned these two
columns into one column to match the original yes or no label for the private column.
Let's go ahead and show you how to do that.
We're going to go ahead and do is create a function to do this.
I'm going to go ahead and paste the model building lines and the predicate lines right here.
We'll call this train model with this console that a little bit.
So after we train the model we're going to go ahead and do is fix this tree spreads so that it matches
what the private column looked like instead of two columns were going to change to one column.
There's lots of ways to do this but I'm going to go ahead and do just a simple apply function method
and then I say tree spreads.
Make sure it's a data frame so say as thought a frame and pasand tree spreads that way I can work with
it.
And then I'm going to create a function call a joiner and what joiner's going to do is it's just going
to join those two columns the no and yes columns is going to take in an x value and it's going to say
if x is greater than or equal to or 0.5
return Yes else we're going to say return no.
And basically what this means is we are going to apply this to the yes column of the tree predict that
function.
Let's go ahead and see if this works.
And when I say tree threads create a new column called private's and I'm going to apply it to the tree
that spreads yes column and then passing the join or function and then we're going to go ahead and make
sure that's all worked by printing the head of tree spreads.
Let's run this and hope that it all works.
OK.
Bye push up the console a bit.
Look we have here we have the original.
No one yes probability columns but by applying joiner we can convert these two columns to a single column
.
Private yes or no.
And I did that by creating this joiner column and this joiner column is only going to be applied to
the yes column and that's how it's working which is why I was able to just check for greater than or
equal to 0.5 for this one column.
If this column is not 0.5 or greater we went ahead and just said it's going to be.
No it's not a private college or university.
Now that we have that let's go ahead and use table we can do this in the council to actually create
the confusion matrix we'll call a tree that Pretz say it's private and then I'm going to say test a
private.
Go ahead and run it.
And it looks like we did it too bad.
Here again it depends on if you're measuring the high costs of recall or precision accuracy and what's
the best way to evaluate your model.
A lot of times people just look at the accuracy of this sort of classification models but it's always
important to check out your rates of false positives false negatives etc. to really adjust and adapt
to what your model is trying to predict.
Let's go ahead and try to plot out the decision tree just so we can interpret it intuitively I'm going
to go ahead and clear the console going to call the library.
The our heart our parts the plot library.
And that way I can just call the pure P function on my tree.
And this makes it really easy to see that tree when you go and zoom in.
And if we take a look at what the tree ended up doing it set the root node as the undergraduate student
amount.
So the full time undergrads is a good predictor of whether or not you're in a private or public college
.
And it set the cutoff at 3000 if you remember back to we were looking at the histogram that kind of
makes sense because a lot of those smaller colleges were most likely to be private then it split on
the out of state tuition which makes a lot of sense because public colleges will have much higher out-of-state
tuition versus in-state tuitions versus private colleges are probably going to have really similar out-of-state
or in-state tuition.
So that also makes sense.
And then you can keep on seeing what other branches and leaves the decision tree had.
Again this is just really cool because you can just call pure on the tree and you get this nice visualization
out of it and it's a lot more intuitive to interpret this decision tree.
Grath OK.
That's it for one of the solutions.
In part two we'll go ahead and check out how to do the same analysis.
But if a random force model just does a quick review of what we did we went ahead and set the college
state of frame or data set from the iso library to death.
We did a train test split after playing around G-G plot two and exploring the data.
We also had to make sure that we when we were trained the model we checked out the predictions by using
this joiner function in order to actually match up the prediction column to the prediction column and
the test data.
All right but those are useful to you and I hope you had fun while you were attempting on your own to
do the project exercise.
I will see you at the next lecture